---
title: "Novel Wound Healing Thermoresponsive Biomatrix with Antimicrobial and Anti-inflammatory Properties"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2012-03-01-talk-1
venue: "8th International Symposium on the Diabetic Foot"
date: 2019-05-23
location: "The Hague, Netherlands"
---


Camp, C., Peterson, I. Novel Wound Healing Thermoresponsive Biomatrix with Antimicrobial and Anti-inflammatory Properties. 8th International Symposium on the Diabetic Foot, presented by Dr. Anne Wertheimer, May 23, 2019.

50% of foot ulcers become infected, and 20% of these infections lead to amputation. Cutaneous wounds provide a complex microbial ecology due to the inflammatory immune response of the hosts and create a uniquely hostile environment for microorganisms. We have created a novel thermoresponsive biomatrix designed to incorporate antimicrobial and antiinflammatory therapeutics. Here we present data from the biomatrix prior to and post embedding non-toxic curcumin into our unique biomatrix. Methods: The biomatrix is a biosynthetically derived elastin like polypeptide (ELP) produced from E.coli. Curcumin was encased in micelles at ratios of 1:10 and 1:50 and infused into the ELP matrix. Uptake and release of curcumin was determined at various temperatures. Antimicrobial efficacy was demonstrated with three unique S. aureus strains and cytotoxicity was evaluated using human fibroblasts. Results: Using spectral data, the thermoregulatory properties of the matrix
revealed a marked burst release of curcumin-micelles at high temperatures and uptake was optimal at low temperatures. Once isolated and fully processed we demonstrate the matrix is free from microbial contamination and contains less than 0.125 EU/mL endotoxin. Using clinical as well as ATCC strains of S. aureus we demonstrate that 0.1mg/mL curcumin encased within micelles at 1:50 and 1:10 ratios killed between 75-95% of the organisms after 2hrs exposure. Remarkably, 1cm2 chips of the fully processed pre-curcumin imbedded biomatrix showed no impact upon human fibroblasts after 6 days culture in 12well dishes. The curcumin embedded micelles had a dose dependent impact upon human fibroblasts cytotoxicity and morphologic response after 45 minutes exposure. Morphology after 24 hours revealed minimal impact of the 1:50 micelles, yet the 1:10 micelles revealed marked impact with cell balling and sluffing of the monolayer again in a dose dependent manner. Conclusion: We have made curcumin more stable and bioavailable as well as control its release by utilizing a combination of micelles for solubilization followed with incorporation into our novel biomatrix. The combination of these unique properties, once optimized, will provide a much-needed preventive/therapeutic for a devastating health condition.

